Lu Xun
Chinese writer
    
Also known as: Lu Hsün, Zhou Shuren
Written by 
Fact-checked by 
Last Updated: Article History
Category: Arts & Culture
Pen name (biming) of: Zhou Shuren
Died: October 19, 1936, Shanghai (aged 55)
Notable Family Members: brother Zhou Zuoren
Subjects Of Study: Chinese literature fiction
Youth
Emily Dickinson (1830-1886) only confirmed photograph of Emily Dickinson. 1978 scan of a Daguerreotype. ca. 1847; in the Amherst College Archives. American poet. See Notes:
Britannica Quiz
Poetry: First Lines
Literary career
Shanghai years
During the last several years of Lu Xun’s life, the government prohibited the publication of most of his work, so he published the majority of his new articles under various pseudonyms. He criticized the Shanghai communist literary circles for their embrace of propaganda, and he was politically attacked by many of their members. In 1934 he described his political position as hengzhan (“horizontal stand”), meaning he was struggling simultaneously against both the right and the left, against both cultural conservatism and mechanical evolution. Hengzhan, the most important idea in Lu Xun’s later thought, indicates the complex and tragic predicament of an intellectual in modern society.
Wang Xiaoming
Zhou Zuoren
Table of Contents
Introduction
References & Edit History
Quick Facts & Related Topics
Images
Zhou Zuoren
Related Questions
What are the major ethnic groups in China?
What UNESCO World Heritage site is found at the heart of Beijing?
9 American Countercultural Books
pacifier, baby, infant, plastic
The Effects of China’s One-Child Policy
5 Stunning Feats of Architecture in Beijing
Ancient book lit by candle
9 Obscure Literary Terms
Periods of American Literature
Discover
Nativity Scene, Adoration of the Magi, Church of the Birth of the Virgin Mary, Montenegro
Why Is Christmas in December?
Lake Issyk-kul kyrgyzstan
9 of the World’s Deepest Lakes
Joan of Arc at the Coronation of King Charles VII at Reims Cathedral, July 1429 by Jean Auguste Dominique Ingres. Oil on canvas, 240 x 178 cm, 1854. In the Louvre Museum, Paris, France.
7 Women Warriors
St. Lucia’s Day
7 Winter Solstice Celebrations From Around the World
Baseball laying in the grass. Homepage blog 2010, arts and entertainment, history and society, sports and games athletics
Home
Literature
Nonfiction Authors L-Z
Arts & Culture
Zhou Zuoren
Chinese author and scholar
   
Also known as: Chou Tso-jen, Zhou Kuishou
Written and fact-checked by 
Last Updated: Article History
Zhou Zuoren
See all media
Category: Arts & Culture
Original name: Zhou Kuishou
Born: January 16, 1885, Shaoxing, Zhejiang province, China
Died: May 6, 1967, Beijing (aged 82)
Notable Family Members: brother Lu Xun
Subjects Of Study: literature
Zhou Zuoren, (born January 16, 1885, Shaoxing, Zhejiang province, China—died May 6, 1967, Beijing), Chinese essayist, critic, and literary scholar who translated fiction and myths from many languages into vernacular Chinese. He was the most important Chinese essayist of the 1920s and 1930s.
Because he remained in Beijing during the Sino-Japanese War (1937–45) and worked for a Japanese-sponsored bureau of education, Zhou was tried as a collaborator by the National Government after the war ended and was condemned to death. His sentence was commuted to imprisonment, and he received a full pardon in 1949, which permitted him to continue his research. After the communist takeover that same year, he returned to Beijing, where he continued to write and translate.