Lu Xun, Translation, and World Literature: Four Insights
November 10, 2022
Calvin Heng, Fairbank Center Blog Contributor
Kent Zheng, Fairbank Blog Contributor
Language and Linguistics, Literature
Cheng and four other noted Chinese literature scholars recently gathered to talk about the new translation, as well as Lu Xun’s voice, his place in history, the art of translation, and world literature. David Damrosch (Harvard), Theodore Huters (UCLA), and Hu Ying (UC-Irvine) joined the discussion, moderated by David Der-wei Wang of Harvard.
Eileen J. Cheng: Surrendering to Other Voices
Lu Xun was “searching for new voices from alien lands (求新声于异邦),” said Cheng. The imaginary world he constructs in Morning Blossoms thus goes beyond the biographical constraints of the author and into the ordinary aspects of daily life. There are no dates. No name of subjects nor locales. Yet, it is in this lack of specificity that we find a universal story: the lament of a child at once celebrates the beauty of being a child at heart and the cruel way in which society and education erode it.
David Damrosch: Global Influences and the Birth of Magazines
Kicking off a vibrant discussion of Lu Xun’s role in the history of world literature, Professor David Damrosch proposed three contexts in which we may conceptualize Lu Xun’s own voice: Inspiration, affinities, and technologies.
First, Lu Xun’s early influences included household names in the history of modern Western literature. The works of Jules Verne and Nikolai Gogol were notable sources of inspiration for Lu Xun. Lu Xun’s early experience and fascination with the problematic of translation prefigured his distinctive voice as an author.
Finally, the rising popularity of the magazine, also a worldwide phenomenon in the early twentieth-century, enabled independent writers like Lu Xun to make ends meet by publishing short stories on a regular basis. The technologies of print capitalism thus shaped Lu Xun’s career as both author and translator, for he also served as a co-editor of the literary magazine New Youth (1915–1926) alongside, among others, the literary scholar and essayist Hu Shi (1891–1962). Significantly, New Youth was known for publishing translations of Japanese and Western writers.
Hu Ying: Where does the Translator Face?
Theodore Huters: Product of Cultural Crisis
Thus riddled with contradictions, Lu Xun’s legacy presents translators with the daunting task of representation: How does one convey the cultural, intellectual, and historical subtexts that undergird Wild Grass and Morning Blossoms Gathered at Dusk, both of which contain layered and intertwining voices from a universal yet diverse cast of characters? What shall we make of the Buddhist and Christian connotations, as one participant in the webinar observed, that also populate many of his works? In the end, we cannot help but think of Eileen Cheng’s own voice as a translator. If Lu Xun sought “new voices from alien lands,” what we heard today was not just a voice from an alien land but, more importantly perhaps, a voice from a different time.