The Legacy and Works of Lu Xun
PRINT 
Portrait of Lu Xun
Bettman / Getty Images
Learning and Teaching Mandarin
Mandarin History and Culture
Pronunciation
Vocabulary
Understanding Chinese Characters
Table of Contents
Early Life
Socio-Political Beliefs
Impact on the Communist Party
National and International Influence
Noted Works
Selected Translated Works
By Charles Custer
Updated on August 13, 2019
Lu Xun (鲁迅) was the pen name of Zhou Shuren (周树人), one of China’s most famous fiction authors, poets, and essayists. He is considered by many to be the father of modern Chinese literature because he was the first serious author to write using modern colloquial language.
Lu Xun died on October 19, 1936, but his works have remained prominent over the years in Chinese culture.
Early Life
Appalled at his countrymen’s apparent callousness, Lu Xun abandoned his study of medicine and vowed to take up writing with the idea that was no point in curing diseases in Chinese people’s bodies if there was a more fundamental problem in their minds that needed curing.
Socio-Political Beliefs
Impact on the Communist Party
Lu Xun’s work has been embraced and to a certain extent co-opted by China’s Communist Party. Mao Zedong held him in very high esteem, although Mao also worked hard to prevent people from taking Lu Xun’s sharp-tongued critical approach when it came to writing about the Party.
Lu Xun himself died well before the communist revolution and it’s difficult to say what he would have thought of it.
National and International Influence
Many Chinese people can quote from several of his stories verbatim, as they are still taught as part of China’s national curriculum. His work also continues to influence modern Chinese authors and writers around the world. Nobel-prize-winning author Kenzaburō Ōe reportedly called him "the greatest writer Asia produced in the twentieth century."
Noted Works
A short, satirical novella called “The True Story of Ah-Q” was published a few years later. In this work, Lu Xun condemns the Chinese psyche through the titular character Ah-Q, a bumbling peasant who constantly considers himself superior to others even as he is relentlessly humiliated and ultimately executed by them. This characterization was on-the-nose enough that the phrase “the Ah-Q spirit” remains widely used even today, nearly 100 years after the story was first published.
Although his early short fiction is among his most memorable work, Lu Xun was a prolific writer and he produced a wide variety of pieces including a large number of translations of Western works, many significant critical essays, and even a number of poems.
Though he only lived to be 55, his complete collected works fill 20 volumes and weigh over 60 pounds.
Selected Translated Works
Other translated works include "The New Year’s Sacrifice," a powerful short story about women’s rights and, more broadly, the dangers of complacency. Also available is "My Old Home," a more reflective tale about memory and the ways in which we relate to the past.