Modularity of Mind
Classical cognitive science assumes that cognition is computation, and endorses the physical symbol system hypothesis. As a result, it merges two theoretical positions that in the seventeenth century were thought to be in conflict. The first is Cartesian rationalism, the notion that the products of thought were rational conclusions drawn from the rule-governed manipulation of pre-existing ideas. The second is anti-Cartesian materialism, the notion that the processes of thought are carried out by physical mechanisms.
The packing problem is concerned with maximizing the computational power of a physical device with limited resources, such as a brain with a finite number of neurons and synapses. How does one pack the maximal computing power into a finite brain? Ballard (1986) argued that many different subsystems, each designed to deal with a limited range of computations, will be easier to fit into a finite package than will be a single general-purpose device that serves the same purpose as all of the subsystems.
If, therefore, we are to start with anything like Turing machines as models in cognitive psychology, we must think of them as embedded in a matrix of subsidiary systems which affect their computations in ways that are responsive to the flow of environmental events. The function of these subsidiary systems is to provide the central machine with information about the world. (Fodor, 1983, p. 39)
According to Fodor (1983), a module is a neural substrate that is specialized for solving a particular information processing problem. It takes input from transducers, preprocesses this input in a particular way (e.g., computing three-dimensional structure from transduced motion signals [Hildreth, 1983; Ullman, 1979]), and passes the result of this preprocessing on to central processes. Because modules are specialized processors, they are domain specific. Because the task of modules is to inform central processing about the dynamic world, modules operate in a fast, mandatory fashion. In order for modules to be fast, domain-specific, and mandatory devices, they will be “wired in,” meaning that a module will be associated with fixed neural architecture. A further consequence of this is that a module will exhibit characteristic breakdown patterns when its specialized neural circuitry fails. All of these properties entail that a module will exhibit informational encapsulation: it will be unaffected by other models or by higher-level results of isotropic processes. In other words, modules are cognitively impenetrable (Pylyshyn, 1984). Clearly any function that can be shown to be modular in Fodor’s sense must be a component of the architecture.
Fodor (1983) argued that modules should exist for all perceptual modalities, and that there should also be modular processing for language. There is a great deal of evidence in support of this position.
For example, consider visual perception. Evidence from anatomy, physiology, and clinical neuroscience has led many researchers to suggest that there exist two distinct pathways in the human visual system (Livingstone& Hubel, 1988; Maunsell &Newsome, 1987; Ungerleider &Mishkin, 1982). One is specialised for processing visual form, i.e., detecting an object’s appearance: the “what pathway.” The other is specialised for processing visual motion, i.e., detecting an object’s changing location: the “where pathway.” This evidence suggests that object appearance and object motion are processed by distinct modules. Furthermore, these modules are likely hierarchical, comprising systems of smaller modules. More than 30 distinct visual processing modules, each responsible for processing a very specific kind of information, have been identified (van Essen, Anderson, & Felleman, 1992).
From both Fodor’s (1983) definition of modularity and the vision and language examples briefly mentioned above, it is clear that neuroscience is a key source of evidence about modularity. “The intimate association of modular systems with neural hardwiring is pretty much what you would expect given the assumption that the key to modularity is informational encapsulation” (p. 98). This is why modularity is an important complement to architectural equivalence: it is supported by seeking data from cognitive neuroscience that complements the cognitive penetrability criterion.
I should like to propose a generalization; one which I fondly hope will someday come to be known as ‘Fodor’s First Law of the Nonexistence of Cognitive Science.’ It goes like this: the more global (e.g., the more isotropic) a cognitive process is, the less anybody understands it. (Fodor, 1983, p. 107)
Not surprisingly, researchers interested in studying music have reacted strongly against this position. There is currently a growing literature that provides support for the notion that musical processing—in particular the perception of rhythm and of tonal profile—is indeed modular (Alossa & Castelli, 2009; Peretz, 2009; Peretz & Coltheart, 2003; Peretz & Hyde, 2003; Peretz & Zatorre, 2003, 2005). The types of evidence reported in this literature are good examples of the ways in which cognitive neuroscience can defend claims about modularity.
A third class of evidence that cognitive neuroscience can provide about modularity comes from a variety of techniques that noninvasively measure regional brain activity as information processing occurs (Cabeza & Kingstone, 2006; Gazzaniga, 2000). Brain imaging data can be used to seek dissociations and attempt to localize function. For instance, by seeing which regions of the brain are active during musical processing but not active when a nonmusical control task is performed, a researcher can attempt to associate musical functions with particular areas of the brain.
Nevertheless, the importance of using evidence from neuroscience to support claims about modularity cannot be understated. In the absence of such evidence, arguments that some function is modular can be easily undermined.
For instance, Gallistel (1990) has argued that the processing of geometric cues by animals facing the reorientation task is modular in Fodor’s (1983) sense. This is because the processing of geometric cues is mandatory (as evidenced by the pervasiveness of rotational error) and not influenced by “information about surfaces other than their relative positions” (Gallistel, 1990, p. 208). However, a variety of theories that are explicitly nonmodular are capable of generating appropriate rotational error in a variety of conditions (Dawson, Dupuis, & Wilson, 2010; Dawson et al., 2010; Miller, 2009; Miller & Shettleworth, 2007, 2008; Nolfi, 2002). As a result, the modularity of geometric cue processing is being seriously re-evaluated (Cheng, 2008).
In summary, many researchers agree that the architecture of cognition is modular. A variety of different kinds of evidence can be marshaled to support the claim that some function is modular and therefore part of the architecture. This evidence is different from, and can complement, evidence about cognitive penetrability. Establishing the nature of the architecture is nonetheless challenging and requires combining varieties of evidence from behavioural and cognitive neuroscientific studies.