Montezuma's Revenge
It must be a bit infuriating for the Indiana Jones franchise to be so poorly represented on the Commodore 64. Among at least four games, they seem to range between terrible and just weird and not really all that good. More so, I imagine, given that there are at least two good games that doesn't carry the Indiana Jones moniker, but could just as well have. One is a certain game called Rick Dangerous, and the other one is... Montezuma's Revenge. The two may or may not later be joined by another distant cousin of theirs that for now only has a PC release; Rocky Memphis and the Temple of Ophuxoff. Is that right? "Ophuxoff"?
Anyway, is it such a difficult concept to create a game that keeps it simple, but introduces some gaming mechanics that challenges your brain and your memory too? You know, seeing as Indy was a man who, inbetween dealing with nazi Germany in various action-packed ways, actually worked as a professor in archeology? Apparently not, as the game was released as early as 1984, yet it literally steamrolled most of the competition in the fun department.
Part of the fun with this game is in its exporative nature. You're free to go whichever way you want as long as you unlock the necessary doorways, meaning the longer you get into the game, the bigger the area you might have to backtrack over now that you have the correct key for whatever door you left behind further up. Yet Montezuma's Revenge doesn't have any time limits to put any unneccesary stress on your situation; because lord knows having to deal with the occupational hazards is more than enough. Don't come into contact with whatever's moving about in there, and don't fall to your death. And by all means; do not accidentally set yourself on fire. Monty's (or whatever his name is) offensive capabilities are limited to picking up random swords or knives scattered about, which allows him to eliminate one enemy of choice by coming into contact with them, or these odd... scepters? Wands? ...that turn all enemies grey and therefore nonfatal on contact for a couple of seconds. Outside of that, Monty can only rely on his agility, of which he is thankfully quite well equipped.
You can tell it's an early eighties game too, if the graphics are any indication. Monty's got this chunky look to him, and he's animated all weirdly, as his kind used to be. But don't let that chunkiness fool you. He moves around as if somebody poured a bucket of fire ants into his pants; running, jumping and climbing with more speed and grace than a lot of videogame characters I've seen. Again, it's not perfect in that precision jumping might occasionally carry some frustrations with it, especially when you have to align yourself as close to a fatal drop as possible to make the jump, and it's got this odd twist of logic in that you can jump through a solid platform as long as there's open space above you, so the game isn't quite as constricting as screenshots may indicate.
One final downside, as is won't with single-load games of this size; stage designs tend to recycle themselves a lot, with some variations when it comes to enemy and key placement, as well as potential doors and... those weird blinking chains that kill on contact, or platforms that blink in and out of existence. I was never really proficient enough in my youth to get far enough in the game to notice, but I imagine this is the one thing that might have potential to make the game feel a bit repetitive from time to time. That said, Montezuma's Revenge is a wonderful game that has lost little of its luster.