Inside the Nail-Biting Quest to Find the 'Loneliest Whale'
It is a tale of sound: the song of a solitary whale that vocalizes at a unique frequency of 52 hertz, which no other whale—as the story goes—can seemingly understand.
It is also a tale about science and ocean life, laced with fantasy and mystery and mostly shrouded in darkness.
The whale, who is of unknown species and nicknamed “52,” was originally discovered in 1989 and has been intermittently tracked by scientists ever since. Its solitary nature baffled marine researchers. And its very existence captured the attention and hearts of millions of people.
But as 52 roams the ocean’s depths, a lot about its nature is still up in the air. No one has ever seen it in the flesh.
Scientists have determined that the whale is a large male and possibly a hybrid, and they have speculated that its unique song—too low in frequency for humans and too high for whales—might be a result of a malformation.
The documentary—written and directed by Zeman and executive produced by actors Leonardo DiCaprio and Adrian Grenier—is inspired by the findings of the late bioacoustics scientist William Watkins. It is propelled by passion and curiosity and relies on underwater acoustics to track 52 through the sound-rich and noise-heavy environment of the ocean.
A departure for Zeman in terms of genre choice, the film still exudes an air of mystery and sleuthing reminiscent of whodunits. It unfolds like a classic true-crime story, a genre that Zeman, an investigative reporter and a true-crime documentarian, was originally famous for working in.
It may not be the closure Zeman expected to give to his audiences. But it is definitely a fresh chapter in this evolving tale.
Zeman says he is hopeful that other storytellers will take up the mantle and continue to unearth more facts about 52.
Full Transcript
[Whale Call]
The mysterious thrum was first picked up in 1989. 
It was detected by an array of surveillance hydrophones set up by the US Navy during the cold war to track Soviet submarines.
They initially thought it was mechanical, possibly an enemy vessel. 
They would come to name it, simply, 52.
The creature was apparently vocalizing at a frequency that no other marine animal seemed to echo back or understand. 
From 1992 to 2004, Watkins, a bioacoustics expert, and his colleagues at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution tracked and recorded the 52-Hz calls. 
For 12 years, 52’s sonic signature was the only proof of life of a whale that seemed to appear and disappear every year, during the mating seasons, across the central and eastern North Pacific. 
Bill Watkins passed away in 2004, aged 78. He would never know 52’s full story. 
Its calls didn’t overlap with any other whales. It spoke in a mixed dialect, reminiscent of blue and fin whales, but it was talking to neither of them.
The solitary denizen of the deep soon became the subject of even more research and speculation. 
And then it became something even more--it was transformed into a living canvas on which we painted stories colored with existential loneliness, projected our sorrows, and searched for some deeper meaning.
To us, 52 became the “world’s loneliest whale.”
And though 52 captured the public's imagination, it mostly remained that in our minds...
...a being imagined; a ghost, a specter in the sea--not a creature of flesh and blood, documented and detailed.
Was he really lonely? Was he calling out for companionship? Can whales feel loneliness and isolation in the same way that we do?
Today, we talk to a filmmaker who mounted an expedition to try and answer these questions and uncover the truth behind 52.
This is Scientific American’s Science Talk podcast. I’m Pakinam Amer. 
[Film Sound Clip]
Josh Zeman: The idea of a lonely creature, really, in essence, it's man’s existential crisis, right? You know, the loneliness crisis to be worthwhile …  that story, that existential crisis story is in the form of a whale, a creature that is so big that it humbles us as human beings and is kind of beautiful and serene and almost spiritual. That was really the initial quest. It was to understand why we as human beings were affected by that idea.
But Josh’s film stands out as much a feat of investigative research as it is an exploration of the science of sound--a not-so solitary mission to triangulate the proverbial needle in an ocean of haystacks. 
Sonar, drones, high-frequency acoustic recording packages or HARPs, and other listening devices told the story.
Josh says the journey changed the way he understood the ocean, which as the saying goes, we know less about than we know about the surface of the moon.
Amer: What is it about this whale in particular that captured your imagination?
And I think because I've just been through a breakup, I was really emotional. I was like, ‘Oh, my God, this story,’ it just floored me. And I guess that is what kind of connected me to the storyline.
But then the weirdest thing was there were all these people around me, I was actually at an art colony. And there was a sculptor, and a painter, and a poet and a writer. And when I got finished with the art colony, all these people called me up and said, ‘Hey, you know that story about the loneliest whale. I did a painting about it, or I get a sculpture about it, or I did a poem about it.’ And I wanted to know more about this creature that seemed to inspire us so much.
Amer: Your film is a deep dive into the technology that is used to track ocean sounds. We get introduced to the history of the sound surveillance networks and hydrophones that are scattered all across the ocean, against the backdrop of a cold war. It’s essentially a panorama of a world where science and politics meet and give way to a story about a whale, the Moby Dick of the social media era, in a way.
And so it's also that juxtaposition of like, the Cold War and submarines, and then this one whale that, like, kind of peeks through all the noise, calling out, ‘find me find me.’
So ...I think we all have that kind of affinity for the Jacques Cousteau 1970s. And we all have that affinity for the early submarine story sea quest. And even further back, we all have that affinity for Moby Dick, you know, in the ideas that these guys were in the holes of the ships listening and hearing the sounds of the whales calling and what that must have sounded like to them. 
[Film Sound Clip]
And I would approach the scientists and they would literally almost laughed me out of the room, they would be like, ‘Are you kidding me? Do you know how hard this is?’ These animals are traveling 25 miles a day, they're on a course, generally, you know, they're like, you see this little square in the ocean? That's 3,000 miles, you know, and I was like, ‘Oh, my God.’
And I did approach NatGeo. I did approach everybody. And of course, their question was a valid one. ‘How do you get the whale? What happens if you don't find it? Or can you make sure you find the whale?’ And so we turned to Kickstarter. And we got the help of Adrian Grenier.
Amer: For any listeners who don’t know, that’s Adrian Grenier--the American actor, producer, director, and musician. He’s probably best known for his portrayal of Vincent Chase in the HBO television series Entourage.
Amer: One of the discoveries that Zeman makes is that the whale is a hybrid, an offspring of blue and fin whales. 
Amer: Whales typically survive in tribes. They're very social creatures. What’s special about this hybrid that enabled it to survive for that long on its own?
Zeman: I don't want to make a false equivalency here. Right. This is a whale that calls out theoretically, never receives a response, we don't or cannot understand receiving a response, or maybe the other whales don't understand that he's calling.
A way to think about it would be to think about our relationship with a deaf person, and how that person just because they can't 100% communicate in an incredibly clear fashion, does not mean they don’t engage with us in a way.
And so, you know, the whale is not completely alone because of its lack of communication. It's just hindered by a lack of communication. So chances are, it is still with a pod of whales that are maybe traveling with some other whales. And again, there's a lack of communication and may be full enriched understanding. But that doesn't mean we're talking about isolation, and then it gets into the questions of loneliness versus aloneness.
[Film Sound Clip]
So we also have other sound experiences in the film, which is listening to the songs of the humpback whale, that monumental album, and really kind of feeling the spirituality of it. And then, of course, the sound experience of ocean noise pollution, and listening to the engines or the cavitating propellers on these huge, huge ships, you know, 90% of everything we buy, you sell comes by way of ship.
So it's also important for us to realize the impact of our consumerism on the ocean. The ocean is so incredibly loud because of the way that it reverberates. And so that's really something to think about and I think it’s really interesting.
Amer: During their search, and because of all the massive containers crossing the oceans around the hour, they almost lost the whale for good. The whale has still never been actually seen by human eyes. 
The movie ends with perhaps the biggest revelation about the whale.
“Every story has an ending, even if it wasn’t the one you expected,” Josh narrates in his film. 
It’s not just one whale. It’s two whales. Probably more. 
But you will have to watch the film to find out how Josh and the scientists tracking 52 came to this conclusion. 
Zeman: We are, in essence, creating an ocean of lonely whales
Amer: Josh Zeman’s film “The Loneliest Whale” is now streaming on Amazon, Apple TV, among other platforms. It was written and directed by Josh and executive produced by Leonardo DiCaprio and Adrian Grenier. Adrian is the co-founder of the Lonely Whale Foundation.
This is Science Talk. And I am Pakinam Amer. Thank you for listening.