The search for the loneliest whale in the world
When people learned he vocalized at a much higher pitch than other whales, they wondered: could other whales hear him? Was he plaintively calling, never hearing a reply? Was he lonely?
Kieran Mulvaney
The loneliest whale in the world lives in the north Pacific. Scientists have been tracking him on and off for more than 30 years – listening to his vocalizations as he swims back and forth across his patch of ocean, calling into the void and waiting for a reply that never comes. That’s the story, anyway. The makers of a new documentary set out to find the truth – and the whale – but what they discovered is that a whale struggling to be heard may not be that unusual at all.
Soon after he was granted access to the hydrophone network, he noticed one call that stood out from the rest: it bore the signature of blue and fin whale calls, but whereas fins vocalize primarily in the 15 to 30Hz range, this whale was vocalizing at 52Hz – still at the lowest limits of human hearing – but for the largest whales, it was the equivalent of speaking like Mickey Mouse.
The whale seemed to speak to people who were experiencing loneliness and doubt. Racked with loneliness and trapped in a day job he hated, a musician composed an album inspired by the whale. A film-maker I spoke to who was suffering daily angst at the unraveling of one of his movies calmed himself by picturing a whale alone in the ocean and listening to recordings of his calls (the whale is almost certainly male). In 2015 the massively popular K-Pop band BTS released Whalien 52, a song about a whale with a “low, calm, and lonely voice” that “can never reach someone else, no matter how hard it shouts”.
Yet the fascination endures. When Joshua Zeman, documentary film-maker and producer of such series as The Killing Season and Sons of Sam, heard about the whale, he began developing a movie that examined those obsessed with the whale as much as the whale himself. Then he changed tack: he would raise money, find a boat and convince a team of scientists to help him find the loneliest whale in the world.
From the outset, the quest seemed profoundly quixotic. In the documentary, entitled The Loneliest Whale: The Search for 52 – available on digital platforms in the US from July 16 – one oceanographer described it as harder than finding a needle in a haystack.
But if the 52Hz whale’s relative proximity to the California coast offered increased accessibility, it also introduced a new challenge: the coast is home to some of the world’s busiest shipping lanes. At one point in the documentary, just as the team hopes it is closing in on their quarry, the scientists’ laptop screens turn red as their hydrophones are overwhelmed by the sound from a passing cargo vessel.
“I didn’t expect that we would wind up having a villain,” says Zeman. “I get all the way out there and you’re telling me that part of the reason we can’t hear [the whale] is because of this thing?”
As the documentary approaches its climax, shipping noise appears to have foiled the searchers’ attempts to find the 52Hz whale. But then the scientists make a shocking discovery, which inspires as many questions as answers – even as it appears definitively to dismiss the romantic notion of the whale’s loneliness.
If you’d like to know more about that discovery, you’ll have to watch the documentary. Regardless, there is a clear takeaway. The deafening sound of a lone container vessel – just one of thousands crisscrossing the ocean – leads us to an ironic realization: while we were troubled about the loneliest whale in the world, tens of thousands of cargo ships have been creating an ocean full of lonely whales, their calls drowned out by the sounds of everyday commerce, rumbling ever louder in a desperate attempt to be heard.