Lu Xun
Chinese writer
    
Also known as: Lu Hsün, Zhou Shuren
Written by 
Fact-checked by 
Last Updated: Article History
Category: Arts & Culture
Wade-Giles romanization: Lu Hsün
Pen name (biming) of: Zhou Shuren
Born: September 25, 1881, Shaoxing, Zhejiang province, China
Died: October 19, 1936, Shanghai (aged 55)
Notable Works: “Diary of a Madman” “The True Story of Ah Q”
Notable Family Members: brother Zhou Zuoren
Subjects Of Study: Chinese literature fiction
Lu Xun, (born September 25, 1881, Shaoxing, Zhejiang province, China—died October 19, 1936, Shanghai), Chinese writer, commonly considered the greatest in 20th-century Chinese literature, who was also an important critic known for his sharp and unique essays on the historical traditions and modern conditions of China.

Youth
Born to a family that was traditional, wealthy, and esteemed (his grandfather had been a government official in Beijing), Zhou Shuren had a happy childhood. In 1893, however, his grandfather was sentenced to prison for examination fraud, and his father became bedridden. The family’s reputation declined, and they were treated with disdain by their community and relatives. This experience is thought to have had a great influence on his writing, which was marked by sensitivity and pessimism.

Emily Dickinson (1830-1886) only confirmed photograph of Emily Dickinson. 1978 scan of a Daguerreotype. ca. 1847; in the Amherst College Archives. American poet. See Notes:
Britannica Quiz
Poetry: First Lines
Zhou Shuren left his hometown in 1899 and attended a mining school in Nanjing; there he developed an interest in Darwin’s theory of evolution, which became an important influence in his work. Chinese intellectuals of the time understood Darwin’s theory to encourage the struggle for social reform, to privilege the new and fresh over the old and traditional. In 1902 he traveled to Japan to study Japanese and medical science, and while there he became a supporter of the Chinese revolutionaries who gathered there. In 1903 he began to write articles for radical magazines edited by Chinese students in Japan. In 1905 he entered an arranged marriage against his will. In 1909 he published, with his younger brother Zhou Zuoren, a two-volume translation of 19th-century European stories, in the hope that it would inspire readers to revolution, but the project failed to attract interest. Disillusioned, Lu Xun returned to China later that year.


Literary career
After working for several years as a teacher in his hometown and then as a low-level government official in Beijing, Lu Xun returned to writing and became associated with the nascent Chinese literary movement in 1918. That year, at the urging of friends, he published his now-famous short story “Kuangren riji” (“Diary of a Madman”). Modeled on the Russian realist Nikolay Gogol’s tale of the same title, the story is a condemnation of traditional Confucian culture, which the madman narrator sees as a “man-eating” society. The first published Western-style story written wholly in vernacular Chinese, it was a tour de force that attracted immediate attention and helped gain acceptance for the short-story form as an effective literary vehicle. Another representative work is the novelette A-Q zhengzhuan (1921; The True Story of Ah Q). A mixture of humour and pathos, it is a repudiation of the old order; it added “Ah Q-ism” to the modern Chinese language as a term characterizing the Chinese penchant for rationalizing defeat as a “spiritual victory.” These stories, which were collected in Nahan (1923; Call to Arms), established Lu Xun’s reputation as the leading Chinese writer. Three years later the collection Panghuang (1926; Wandering) was published. His various symbolic prose poems, which were published in the collection Yecao (1927; Wild Grass), as well as his reminiscences and retold classical tales, all reveal a modern sensibility informed by sardonic humour and biting satire.

In the 1920s Lu Xun worked at various universities in Beijing as a part-time professor of Chinese script and literature. His academic study Zhongguo xiaoshuo shilue (1923–24; A Brief History of Chinese Fiction) and companion compilations of classical fiction remain standard works. His translations, especially those of Russian works, are also considered significant.

Despite his success, Lu Xun continued to struggle with his increasingly pessimistic view of Chinese society, which was aggravated by conflicts in his personal and professional life. In addition to marital troubles and mounting pressures from the government, his disagreements with Zhou Zuoren (who had also become one of the leading intellectuals in Beijing) led to a rift between the two brothers in 1926. Such depressing conditions led Lu Xun to formulate the idea that one could resist social darkness only when he was pessimistic about the society. His famous phrase “resistance of despair” is commonly considered a core concept of his thought.



Are you a student? Get Britannica Premium for only $24.95 - a 67% discount!
Shanghai years
Forced by these political and personal circumstances to flee Beijing in 1926, Lu Xun traveled to Xiamen and Guangzhou, finally settling in Shanghai in 1927. There he began to live with Xu Guangping, his former student; they had a son in 1929. Lu Xun stopped writing fiction and devoted himself to writing satiric critical essays (zawen), which he used as a form of political protest. In 1930 he became the nominal leader of the League of Left-Wing Writers. During the following decade he began to see the Chinese communists as the only salvation for his country. Although he himself refused to join the Chinese Communist Party, he considered himself a tongluren (fellow traveler), recruiting many writers and countrymen to the communist cause through his Chinese translations of Marxist literary theories, as well as through his own political writing.

During the last several years of Lu Xun’s life, the government prohibited the publication of most of his work, so he published the majority of his new articles under various pseudonyms. He criticized the Shanghai communist literary circles for their embrace of propaganda, and he was politically attacked by many of their members. In 1934 he described his political position as hengzhan (“horizontal stand”), meaning he was struggling simultaneously against both the right and the left, against both cultural conservatism and mechanical evolution. Hengzhan, the most important idea in Lu Xun’s later thought, indicates the complex and tragic predicament of an intellectual in modern society.

The Chinese communist movement adopted Lu Xun posthumously as the exemplar of Socialist Realism. Many of his fiction and prose works have been incorporated into school textbooks. In 1951 the Lu Xun Museum opened in Shanghai; it contains letters, manuscripts, photographs, and other memorabilia. English translations of Lu Xun’s works include Silent China: Selected Writings of Lu Xun (1973), Lu Hsun: Complete Poems (1988), and Diary of a Madman and Other Stories (1990).


Wang Xiaoming


Zhou Zuoren
Table of Contents
Introduction
References & Edit History
Quick Facts & Related Topics
Images
Zhou Zuoren
Related Questions
What are the major ethnic groups in China?
What UNESCO World Heritage site is found at the heart of Beijing?
Read Next
Girl Reading On Turquoise Couch
9 American Countercultural Books
pacifier, baby, infant, plastic
The Effects of China’s One-Child Policy
Beijing Olympics 2008. Beijing National Stadium, known as the Bird's Nest, Aug. 8, 2008 Beijing, China. Herzog & de Meuron collaborated with ArupSport and China Architecture Design & Research Group (see notes)
5 Stunning Feats of Architecture in Beijing
Ancient book lit by candle
9 Obscure Literary Terms
Chapter 4 pg 42 - Chapter header of The Adventures of Tom Sawyer by Mark Twain. Published in 1884 by The American Publishing Company
Periods of American Literature
Discover
Nativity Scene, Adoration of the Magi, Church of the Birth of the Virgin Mary, Montenegro
Why Is Christmas in December?
Lake Issyk-kul kyrgyzstan
9 of the World’s Deepest Lakes
Joan of Arc at the Coronation of King Charles VII at Reims Cathedral, July 1429 by Jean Auguste Dominique Ingres. Oil on canvas, 240 x 178 cm, 1854. In the Louvre Museum, Paris, France.
7 Women Warriors
Saint Lucy. St. Lucia's Day. Saint Lucia Day. Feast of Saint Lucia procession in Syracuse, Italy, December 13. Marks beginning of Christmas season. Christian saint, virgin and martyr died 304 when her neck was pierced by a sword. Luciadagen
St. Lucia’s Day
Statue of Nostradamus
Nostradamus and His Prophecies
Saint Lucia Day. Young girl wears Lucia crown (tinsel halo) with candles. Holds Saint Lucia Day currant laced saffron buns (lussekatter or Lucia's cats). Observed December 13 honor virgin martyr Santa Lucia (St. Lucy). Luciadagen, Christmas, Sweden
7 Winter Solstice Celebrations From Around the World
Baseball laying in the grass. Homepage blog 2010, arts and entertainment, history and society, sports and games athletics
10 Greatest Baseball Players of All Time
Home
Literature
Nonfiction
Nonfiction Authors L-Z
Arts & Culture
Zhou Zuoren
Chinese author and scholar
   
Also known as: Chou Tso-jen, Zhou Kuishou
Written and fact-checked by 
Last Updated: Article History
Zhou Zuoren
Zhou Zuoren
See all media
Category: Arts & Culture
Wade-Giles romanization: Chou Tso-jen
Original name: Zhou Kuishou
Born: January 16, 1885, Shaoxing, Zhejiang province, China
Died: May 6, 1967, Beijing (aged 82)
Notable Family Members: brother Lu Xun
Subjects Of Study: literature
Zhou Zuoren, (born January 16, 1885, Shaoxing, Zhejiang province, China—died May 6, 1967, Beijing), Chinese essayist, critic, and literary scholar who translated fiction and myths from many languages into vernacular Chinese. He was the most important Chinese essayist of the 1920s and 1930s.

Zhou Zuoren, who was the younger brother of the renowned writer Zhou Shuren (literary name [hao] Lu Xun), received a classical education. In 1906 the two brothers went to Japan, where Zhou Zuoren studied Japanese language and literature, Classical Greek literature, and English literature. He translated and published, together with Lu Xun, a collection of European fiction, selecting works to stimulate the people of China with the examples of others who had rebelled under oppressive rule.

Zhou and his Japanese wife returned to China in 1911. He became a professor at Peking University in 1917 and began writing the essays that won him renown. Among his favourite topics were the need for language reform and the use of the vernacular; he also advocated what he termed a “humane” literature and praised the realism of Western writers. His collections of translations—from Greek, Roman, Russian, and Japanese literature—continued to be published as his popularity as an authority in foreign literature increased.


Because he remained in Beijing during the Sino-Japanese War (1937–45) and worked for a Japanese-sponsored bureau of education, Zhou was tried as a collaborator by the National Government after the war ended and was condemned to death. His sentence was commuted to imprisonment, and he received a full pardon in 1949, which permitted him to continue his research. After the communist takeover that same year, he returned to Beijing, where he continued to write and translate.