Great Wall of China
wall, China
    
Also known as: Wan-li Ch’ang-ch’eng, Wanli Changcheng
Written and fact-checked by 
Last Updated: Article History
Category: Geography & Travel
Top Questions
Why was the Great Wall of China built?
How long is the Great Wall of China?
How old is the Great Wall of China?
Can you see the Great Wall of China from space?
Great Wall of China, near Beijing.
Great Wall of China, eastern Asia, designated a World Heritage site in 1987.
Great Wall of China, extensive bulwark erected in ancient China, one of the largest building-construction projects ever undertaken. The Great Wall actually consists of numerous walls—many of them parallel to each other—built over some two millennia across northern China and southern Mongolia. The most extensive and best-preserved version of the wall dates from the Ming dynasty (1368–1644) and runs for some 5,500 miles (8,850 km) east to west from Mount Hu near Dandong, southeastern Liaoning province, to Jiayu Pass west of Jiuquan, northwestern Gansu province. This wall often traces the crestlines of hills and mountains as it snakes across the Chinese countryside, and about one-fourth of its length consists solely of natural barriers such as rivers and mountain ridges. Nearly all of the rest (about 70 percent of the total length) is actual constructed wall, with the small remaining stretches constituting ditches or moats. Although lengthy sections of the wall are now in ruins or have disappeared completely, it is still one of the more remarkable structures on Earth. The Great Wall was designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 1987.
Explore China's iconic cultural monument the Great Wall of China
Overview of the Great Wall of China.See all videos for this article
The Great Wall of China at Shanhaiguan, Hebei province, China.
History of construction
The Great Wall developed from the disparate border fortifications and castles of individual Chinese kingdoms. For several centuries these kingdoms probably were as concerned with protection from their near neighbours as they were with the threat of barbarian invasions or raids.
Early building
Moon rising over the Great Wall of China
Moon rising (left background) over the Great Wall of China.
Great Wall of China. In c. 220 B.C., under Qin Shi Huang, sections of earlier fortifications were joined together to form a united defence system against invasions from the north. Construction continued up to the Ming dynasty (1368-1644), when (see notes)
Britannica Quiz
A Quiz About Walls and More
In the Yan state two separate defensive lines were prepared—the Northern Wall and the Yishui Wall—in an effort to defend the kingdom from attacks by northern groups such as the Donghu, Linhu, and Loufan, as well as by the Qi state in the south. The Yishui Wall was expanded from the dike of the Yi River as a defense line against Qi and Zhao, its two main rival states. It began southwest of Yi City, the capital, and ended south of Wen’an. In 290 BCE the Yan state built the Northern Wall along the Yan Mountains, starting from the northeast in the area of Zhangjiakou in Hebei, passing over the Liao River, and extending to the ancient city of Xiangping (modern Liaoyang). This was the last segment of the Great Wall to be erected during the Zhanguo (Warring States) period.
Great Wall of China at Mutianyu, northeast of Beijing.
The Han through Yuan dynasties
A portion of the Great Wall of China near Qinhuangdao, Hebei province, northeastern China.
During the Bei (Northern) Wei dynasty (386–534/535 CE), the Great Wall was repaired and extended as a defense against attacks from the Juan-juan and Khitan tribes in the north. According to Wei shu: Mingyuandi Ji (“History of Wei: Chronicle of Emperor Mingyuan”), in 417, the eighth year of the reign of Mingyuandi (409–423), a part of the Great Wall was built south of Changchuan, from Chicheng (now in Hebei) to Wuyuan (now in Inner Mongolia) in the west, extending more than 620 miles (1,000 km). During the reign of Taiwudi (423–452), a lower and thinner wall of rammed earth was built around the capital as a complement to the Great Wall. Starting from Guangling in the east, it extended to the eastern side of the Huang He, forming a circle around Datong. In 549, after the Dong Wei kingdom moved its capital east to Ye, it also built a segment of the Great Wall in the area of contemporary Shanxi province.
Great Wall of China: Juyong Pass
Great Wall of China at Juyong Pass.
During the Yuan (Mongol) dynasty (1206–1368), the Mongols controlled all of China, as well as other parts of Asia and sections of Europe. As a defensive structure the Great Wall was of little significance to them; however, some forts and key areas were repaired and garrisoned in order to control commerce and to limit the threat of rebellions from the Chinese (Han) and other nationalities.
The Ming dynasty to the present
The western limit of the Great Wall of China viewed from a Ming fortress (1372), near Jiuquan, Gansu province.
Rulers during the Ming dynasty (1368–1644) ceaselessly maintained and strengthened the Great Wall to prevent another Mongolian invasion. The majority of the work took place along the old walls built by the Bei Qi and Bei Wei.
Tourists on a section of the Great Wall of China near Beijing.
Most of the Great Wall that stands today is the result of work done during the reign of the Hongzhi emperor (1487–1505). Starting west of Juyong Pass, this part of the wall was split into south and north lines, respectively named the Inner and Outer walls. Along the wall were many strategic “passes” (i.e., fortresses) and gates. Among them were Juyong, Daoma, and Zijing passes, the three closest to the Ming capital Beijing. Together they were referred to as the Three Inner Passes. Farther west were Yanmen, Ningwu, and Piantou passes, known as the Three Outer Passes. Both the Inner and Outer passes were of key importance in protecting the capital and were usually heavily garrisoned.
Design of the fortifications
Great Wall of China. In c. 220 B.C., under Qin Shi Huang, sections of earlier fortifications were joined together to form a united defence system against invasions from the north. Construction continued up to the Ming dynasty (1368-1644), when (see notes)
Britannica Quiz
A Quiz About Walls and More
Passes
westernmost portion of the Great Wall of China
Westernmost portion of the Great Wall of China at Jiayu Pass, near Jiuquan, Gansu province; a Ming fortress built in 1372 is in the upper centre background.
Signal towers were also called beacons, beacon terraces, smoke mounds, mounds, or kiosks. They were used to send military communications: beacon (fires or lanterns) during the night or smoke signals in the daytime; other methods such as raising banners, beating clappers, or firing guns were also used. Signal towers, often built on hilltops for maximum visibility, were self-contained high platforms or towers. The lower levels contained rooms for soldiers, as well as stables, sheepfolds, and storage areas.
Walls
Great Wall of China
rebuilt section of the Great Wall of China
Rebuilt section of the Great Wall of China near Simatai, northeast of Beijing.
Great Wall of China: watchtower
Watchtower on the Great Wall of China at Mutianyu, northeast of Beijing.
Despite the wall’s cultural significance, roadways have been cut through it at several points, and vast sections have suffered centuries of neglect. In the 1970s a segment near Simatai (68 miles [110 km] northeast of Beijing) was dismantled for building materials, but it was subsequently rebuilt. Other areas have also been restored, including just northwest of Jiayu Pass at the western limit of the wall; at Huangya Pass, some 105 miles (170 km) north of Tianjin; and at Mutianyu, about 55 miles (90 km) northeast of Beijing. The best-known section, at Badaling (43 miles [70 km] northwest of Beijing), was rebuilt in the late 1950s; it now attracts thousands of national and foreign tourists every day. Portions of the wall around Shanhai Pass and at Mount Hu, the eastern terminus, also had been rebuilt by 2000.